---
title: Theory：Ternary operator
date: 2022-08-09 14:07:10
permalink: /pages/1546f6/
tags:
  - Java basic
---
The **ternary operator** is an operator which evaluates a condition and chooses one of two cases to execute. It is also called the **conditional operator**. The operator can be considered as a form of the `if`-then-`else` statement. The ternary operator should not be confused with the conditional statement, despite their similarity. This operator can be used in places where an expression is expected.

Sometimes **the ternary operator** is more readable and concise than the corresponding **if statement**.

Let's start learning this operator with an example. Suppose we have to find the maximum of two int variables, `a` and `b`. It is easy to write using a conditional statement:

```java
int a = ...;
int b = ...;
int max = ...;

if (a > b) {
    max = a;
} else {
    max = b;
}
```

Here is what an equivalent ternary operator looks like:

```java
int max = a > b ? a : b;
```

This code is more concise than the code above, isn't it?

The general syntax of the ternary operator is the following:

```java
result = condition ? trueCase : elseCase;
```

It includes two special symbols `?` and `:`.

Here, the `condition` is a Boolean expression that evaluates to either `true` or `false`. If this expression is `true`, the ternary operator evaluates `trueCase`, otherwise `elseCase` is evaluated. It is important that `trueCase` and `elseCase` are expressions which can be reduced to a common type. This type determines the type of the `result`.

Let's consider another example that prints whether a number is even or odd.

```java
int num = ...;  // it's initialized by a value
System.out.println(num % 2 == 0 ? "even" : "odd");
```

This ternary operator consists of three operands: the value of the expression `num % 2 == 0`, and two string literals `"even"` and `"odd"`. Its result type is `String`.


:::tip
Note: Java allows us to nest one ternary operator into another one, but it can be less readable than the corresponding conditional statement. If you do this, be careful.
:::


Imagine you need to compare 2 integer numbers and print `equal` in case they are equal, `more` if the first one has a bigger value than the second and `less` otherwise. The task can be solved using a combination of 2 ternary operators:

```java
int a = ...; // it's initialized by a value
int b = ...; // it's initialized by a value
String result = a == b ? "equal" :
                a > b ? "more" : "less";
```

At first, the outer ternary operator checks equality of `a` and `b` numbers. If it is true, `equal` is printed, otherwise, the nested ternary operator `a > b ? "more" : "less"` is calculated. To improve readability, the whole expression is divided into 2 lines.