---
title: Thoery：Constructor
date: 2022-05-06 20:04:09
permalink: /pages/616a21/
tags:
  - Java
  - OOP
---
<div style="background-image: url(https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/JimFKppt/Pictures@master/static_files/img/milad-fakurian-UiiHVEyxtyA-unsplash.jpg); background-size: cover;">
    <iframe :src="$withBase('/markmap/Markmap_Theory：Constructor.html')" width="100%" height="450" frameborder="0" scrolling="No" leftmargin="0" topmargin="0"></iframe>
</div>

**Constructors** are special methods that initialize a **new object** of the class. A constructor of a class is invoked when an instance is created using the keyword `new`.

A constructor is different from other methods in that:

- it has the same name as the class that contains it;
- it has no return type (not even `void`).

Constructors initialize **instances** (objects) of the class. They set values to the fields when the object is created. Also, constructors can take parameters for initializing fields by the given values.

## Using constructors

Here is a class named `Patient`. An object of the class has a name, an age, and a height. The class has a three-argument constructor to initialize objects with specific values.

```java
class Patient {

    String name;
    int age;
    float height;

    public Patient(String name, int age, float height) {
        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.height = height;
    }
}
```

Let's go further and create some instances of the class using the constructor we've written:

```java
Patient patient1 = new Patient("Heinrich", 40, 182.0f);
Patient patient2 = new Patient("Mary", 33, 171.5f);
```

Now we have two patients, Heinrich and Mary, with the same fields, but the values of those fields are different.

## Keyword this

In the example above, `Patient` constructor takes three parameters:

```java
this.name = name;
this.age = age;
this.height = height;
```

To initialize the fields, the keyword `this` is used, which is a reference to the current object. Usually, the keyword `this` is used when an instance variable and a constructor or a method variable share the same name. This keyword helps to disambiguate these situations.

If you write something like `name = name`, it means that you're assigning the `name` variable to itself, which, of course, doesn't make any sense. Frankly speaking, you may distinguish two objects simply by assigning another name to the variable, like `name = newName`. It is not prohibited, but it is considered bad practice since these variables point to the same thing. These are the reasons why the keyword `this`is extremely useful with constructors, fields, and methods. The absence of extra variables makes the code look clearer and less overloaded.

## Default and no-argument constructor

The compiler automatically provides **a default no-argument constructor** for any class without constructors.

```java
class Patient {

    String name;
    int age;
    float height;
}
```

We can create an instance of the class `Patient` using the no-argument default constructor:

```java
Patient patient = new Patient();
```

In this case, all fields will be filled with the default values of their types.

If you define a specific constructor, the default constructor will not be created.

We can also define a constructor without any arguments, but use it to set default values for fields of a class. For example, we can initialize `name` with `"Unknown"`:

```java
class Patient {

    String name;
    int age;
    float height;

    public Patient() {
        this.name = "Unknown";
    }
}
```

Such no-argument constructors are useful in cases when any default value is better than `null`.

## To sum up

- Any Java class has a constructor to initialize objects;
- A constructor has the same name as the class containing it;
- A constructor has no return type, not even `void`;
- If a class has no explicit constructors, the Java compiler automatically provides a default no-argument constructor;
- If we want to introduce new variables to denote the same thing, make the code clearer and less loaded with extra variables, the keyword `this` is used.