---
title: Theory：Generics and Object
date: 2022-09-28 16:29:42
permalink: /pages/47e30b/
tags:
  - Generic
  - Java
---
As you know, **generics** enable us to parameterize types when defining classes (or interfaces) and methods. Parameterized types make it possible to re-use the same code while processing different concrete types.

## Reusing code with generics

Let's consider a generic class named `GenericType` that stores a value of "some type".

```java
class GenericType<T> { 

    private T t;

    public GenericType(T t) {
        this.t = t;
    }

    public T get() {
        return t;
    }
}
```

It is possible to create an object with a concrete type (e.g., `String`):

```java
GenericType<String> instance1 = new GenericType<>("abc");
String str = instance1.get();
```

We can also create instances with other types (`Integer`, `Character`) and then invoke the `get` method to access the internal field. In this manner, generics allow us to use the same class and methods for processing different types.

## Reusing code with Object

But there is another way to reuse code. If we declare a field of type `Object`, we can assign a value of any reference type to it. This approach was widely used before the introduction of generics in Java 5.

The following class demonstrates this concept:

```java
class NonGenericClass {

    private Object val;

    public NonGenericClass(Object val) {
        this.val = val;
    }

    public Object get() {
        return val;
    }
}
```

Now we can create an instance of this class with the same string as in the previous example (see `GenericType`).

```java
NonGenericClass instance2 = new NonGenericClass("abc");
```

It is also possible to create an instance by passing in a value of type `Integer`, `Character`, or any other reference type.

Using the `Object` class this way allows us to reuse the same class to store different data types.

## The advantage of generics: from run-time to compile-time

After an invocation of the `get()` method we obtain an `Object`, not a `String` or an `Integer`. We cannot get a string directly from the method.

```java
NonGenericClass instance2 = new NonGenericClass("abc");
String str = instance2.get(); // Compile-time error: Incompatible types
```

To get the string back, we must perform an explicit type-cast to the `String` class.

```java
String str = (String) instance2.get(); // "abc"
```

This works because a string was passed into `instance2`. But what if the instance does not store a string? If this is the case, the code throws an exception. Here is an example:

```java
NonGenericClass instance3 = new NonGenericClass(123);
String str = (String) instance3.get(); // throws java.lang.ClassCastException
```

Now we can see the main advantage of generics over the `Object` class. Because there is no need to perform an explicit type-cast, we never get a runtime exception. If we do something wrong, we can see it at compile-time.

```java
GenericType<String> instance4 = new GenericType<>("abc");
        
String str = instance4.get(); // There is no type-casting here
Integer num = instance4.get(); // It does not compile
```

A compile-time error will be detected by the programmer, not a user of the program. Because generics let the compiler take care of type casting, generics are both safer and more flexible compared to the `Object` class.

## Generics without specifying a type argument

When you create an instance of a generic class, you have the option to not specify an argument type at all.

```java
GenericType instance5 = new GenericType("my-string");
```

In this case, the field of the class is `Object`, and the `get` method returns an `Object` as well.

The above code is equivalent to the following line:

```java
GenericType<Object> instance5 = new GenericType<>("abc"); // it is parameterized with Object
```

Usually, you will not use generics parameterized by `Object` due to the same problems as presented above. Just remember that this possibility exists.

## Conclusion

Both generics and Object allow you to write generalized code. Using `Object`, however, may require explicit type-casting, which can lead to error-prone code. Generics provide type-safety by shifting type checking responsibilities to the Java compiler.