---
title: Theory：Annotations basics
date: 2022-06-21 20:56:57
permalink: /pages/2e50ec/
tags:
  - Java
---
<div style="background-image: url(https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/JimFKppt/Pictures@master/static_files/img/milad-fakurian-UiiHVEyxtyA-unsplash.jpg); background-size: cover;">
    <iframe :src="$withBase('/markmap/Markmap_Theory：Annotations basics.html')" width="100%" height="450" frameborder="0" scrolling="No" leftmargin="0" topmargin="0"></iframe>
</div>

An **annotation** is a special Java instrument that provides information about a program. Its main goal is to make programmers' lives easier. To give them a more formal definition, annotations are a form of metadata, which means they are not part of the program itself.

You can mark classes, methods, fields, variables, and other parts of a program with annotations. When you do it, annotations provide information for the compiler, for some development tools, or for frameworks and libraries at runtime.

Now that you know how useful they are, you have no other choice but to make friends with annotations!

## Annotation, where are you?

But do you understand that the day has come and what is in front of you is your first annotation? All annotations are started with the **`@`** symbol followed by the annotation name, and they are usually marked with a color different from the code.

Here is an example:

```java
@Override
public void printName() {
    System.out.println(this.name);
}
```

`@Override` is an annotation here.

:::tip
You can also mark a class/method/field/etc with two or more annotations!
:::

## Built-in annotations

Java has several built-in annotations. If you want to use other annotations, you will need to include libraries or frameworks, or even create your own annotations.

But first, let's discuss the three main built-in annotations that were presented to the world in Java 5:

- ```java
  @Deprecated
  ```

   

  is a simple annotation which means that the marked method (or class, field, and so on) is deprecated, that is, obsolete and should no longer be used. This annotation causes a compile warning if the code is used.

  ```java
  @Deprecated
  public void oldMethod() {
      System.out.println("Hello!");
  }
  ```

- ```java
  @SuppressWarnings
  ```

   

  commands the compiler to disable some compile-time warnings. You specify in parameters which warnings you don't want to see, for example:

  ```java
  @SuppressWarnings("unused")
  public void printHello() {
      System.out.println("Hello!");
  }
  ```

Imagine you created a method `printHello` but didn't use it. The compiler doesn't like unused methods, but with the `@SuppressWarnings("unused")` annotation where "unused" is a parameter, you can disable that compile warning. This annotation can be applied to classes, methods, fields, local variables, and other parts of the program.

- `@Override` marks a method that overrides a superclass method. This annotation can only be applied to methods. We will consider it in detail in a separate topic about overriding methods.

## Annotation elements

Some annotations have **elements**, where an element is similar to an attribute or a parameter. You have already seen an example of an element in a previous section. Let's give it a closer look.

Remember the annotation called `@SuppressWarnings`? It takes the type of warning you want to disable as a parameter.

```java
@SuppressWarnings("unused") 
public void printHello() {
    System.out.println("Hello!");
}
```

If you show some curiosity and look inside the `@SuppressWarnings` annotation, you will find out that it has only one element named `value`. Because the element is just one *and* is called `value`, it can be omitted, but the full definition will look like this:

```java
@SuppressWarnings(value = "unused")
public void printHello() {
    System.out.println("Hello!");
}
```


:::tip
Pay attention the full definition could be omitted for **value** field only. For other field names full definition is required
:::

An annotation element can also be an array. In fact, the actual type of `value` in`@SuppressWarnings` annotation is `String[]`:

```java
@SuppressWarnings({"unused", "deprecation"})
public void printHello() { ... }
```

`"deprecation"`, as you might have guessed from the name, instructs the compiler to suppress warnings about the use of deprecated code.

Finally, the last thing you need to know is that some annotations have a default value for an element, and some don't.

```java
@SuppressWarnings // wrong syntax, there is no default value!
public void printHello() {
    System.out.println("Hello!");
}
```

For example, `@SuppressWarnings` doesn't have a default value, so you can't skip it.

## `@Deprecated` annotation

For many years the `@Deprecated` annotation didn't have any elements, but starting from Java 9 it has two: `since` and `forRemoval`. We will quickly break them down because there is a big chance you will meet them in practice.

- `since` requires the version (String) in which the annotated element has become deprecated. The default value is an empty string.
- `forRemoval` indicates whether the annotated element is to be removed in a future version. The default value is `false`.

```java
@Deprecated(since = "5.3", forRemoval = true)
public void printHello() {
    System.out.println("Hello!");
}
```

The example above means that the `printHello` method has been deprecated since version 5.3 of our library and it will be removed in the next release.

## Wow, a custom annotation

Fear not: we won't create any new annotations in this topic. But we will look into two annotations from external sources.
Both `@NotNull` and `@Range` annotations mark classes, fields, methods, and parameters.

The `@NotNull` annotation indicates that:

- a variable cannot be `null`;
- a method should not return `null`.

And the `@Range` annotation indicates that:

- a variable always belongs to the specified range;
- a method returns an integer number that belongs to the specified range.

Now let's look at our class called `GameCharacter`:

```java
class GameCharacter {

    @NotNull
    private String login;

    @Range(min = 1, max = 100)
    private int level = 1;

    public GameCharacter(
            @NotNull String login,
            @Range(min = 1, max = 100) int level) {

        this.login = login;
        this.level = level;
    }

    @NotNull
    public String getLogin() {
        return login;
    }

    @Range(min = 1, max = 100)
    public int getLevel() {
        return level;
    }
}
```

Here these annotations will help you by showing warnings if `login` contains `null`, or if the `level` of your character is less than 1 or more than 100.



`@NotNull` is taken from [JetBrains](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/nullable-and-notnull-annotations.html) and `@Range` is taken from the popular framework Hibernate.

## Conclusion

In this topic, you finally learned about annotations and now you know that their main goal is to provide some important information to the compiler, development tools, frameworks, and libraries at runtime. Some annotations contain elements, for which you can provide values. You also learned about the three built-in annotations and looked at a couple of examples of custom annotations. And in the next topic, you will learn how to create them yourself.

In real-life programming, you will meet plenty of different annotations, but there is no reason to be afraid: they are here to make your life easier and you can always find the explanations you need in documentation.